[DOC] Add tail sampling doc (#4766)
grafana/tempo: docs/sources/tempo/configuration/grafana-alloy/tail-sampling/_index.md

With a head sampling strategy, the decision to sample the trace is usually made as early as possible and doesn’t need to take into account the whole trace.
It’s a simple but effective sampling strategy.
Refer to the [Head sampling documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/monitor-applications/application-observability/collector/sampling/head/#head-sampling) for [Application Observability](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/monitor-applications/application-observability/) for more information.

With a tail sampling strategy, the decision to sample a trace is made after considering all or most of the spans. For example, tail sampling is a good option to sample only traces that have errors or traces with long request duration.
Tail sampling is more complex to configure, implement, and maintain but is the recommended sampling strategy for large systems with a high telemetry volume.

For more information about sampling, refer to the [OpenTelemetry Sampling](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/sampling/) documentation.

![Tail sampling overview and components with Tempo, Alloy, and Grafana](/media/docs/tempo/sampling/tempo-tail-based-sampling.svg)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## A note on telemetry correlation
Sampling is a decision on whether or not to keep (and then store) a trace, or whether to drop it, and this has implications when it comes to correlating trace data with other signals.

For example, many services that are instrumented also produce logs, metrics or profiles. These signals can reference each other, and in the case of a trace this may be via a trace ID embedded into a [log line](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/datasources/tempo/traces-in-grafana/link-trace-id/), an [exemplar](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/fundamentals/exemplars/) embedded into a metric value, or a profile ID embedded into a trace (https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/monitor-applications/profiles/traces-to-profiles/). 

By choosing not to sample a trace (dropping a trace), there may be instances where a particular signal references that dropped trace's ID. This can lead to a situation in Grafana where following a link to a trace ID from a log line, or an exemplar from a metric value, results in a query for that trace ID failing because the trace has not been sampled. This also means that profiles may not show up without specifically querying for them, because a trace that would have included the profile's flame graph has not been stored.

This isn't usually a huge issue, because sampling policies tend to be chosen that show non-normative behaviour (errors being thrown, long latencies on requests, etc.), and an observer is more likely to be choosing traces that show these issues rather than the required behaviour (which tend to not be as useful to keep traces for). It is well worth understanding how signals can correlate between each other to determine how to choose these policies.
```

## How tail sampling works in the OpenTelemetry Tail Sampling Processor

> In tail-based sampling, sampling decisions are made at the end of the workflow allowing for a more accurate sampling decision.

Author: ```suggestion
In tail sampling, sampling decisions are made at the end of the workflow allowing for a more accurate sampling decision.
```

---
title: Sampling
menuTItle: Sampling
description: Use sampling to optimize sampling decisions
weight:
aliases:
- /docs/tempo/grafana-alloy/tail-based-sampling
- ../tail-based-sampling/
---

> # Sampling

Reviewer 2: i'm wondering about the positioning of the sampling concepts - since sampling isn't just tempo, right? it's a technique used across the different signals, too? maybe we say Grafana rather than Grafana Tempo, too?

> Grafana Tempo provides an inexpensive solution that aims to ingest and store the traces that provide maximum observability across your application estate.

Reviewer 2: not sure about the word "inexpensive" and it's connotations - perhaps just leave out?

Author: Maybe cost effective instead of inexpensive? 
```suggestion
Grafana Tempo provides a cost-effective solution that aims to ingest and store the traces that provide maximum observability across your application estate.
```

Reviewer 2: that sounds good to me:)

However, sometimes constraints mean that storing all of your traces is not desirable, for example runtime or egress traffic related costs.
There are a number of ways to lower trace volume, including varying sampling strategies.

> Sampling is the process of determining which traces to store (in Tempo or Grafana Cloud Traces) and which to discard. Sampling comes in two different strategy types: head and tail sampling.

Reviewer 2: again - i think if the intention of the doc is to provide generic conceptual docs on sampling - then we shouldn't refer to it as being tempo or traces specific? We'd split the generic conceptual stuff out and then have product-specific docs living in each of our areas for the details on each product? Or you rename the doc to Sampling in Traces?

For instance, a policy can check if a trace contains an error or the trace duration was longer than a specified threshold.

A trace is sampled if it meets the conditions of at least one policy.

### Decision periods

To group spans by trace ID, Alloy buffers spans for a configurable amount of time, after which it considers the trace complete.
This configurable amount of time is known as the decision period. Longer running traces are split into more than one.

In situations where a specific trace is longer in duration than the decision period, multiple decisions might be made for any future spans that fall outside of the decision period window.
This can result in some spans for a trace being sampled, while others are not.

For example, consider a situation where the tail sampler decision period is 10 seconds, and a single policy exists to sample traces where an error is set on at least one span.
One of the traces is 20 seconds in duration and a single span at time offset 15 seconds exhibits an error status.

![Trace Policy: Error when status exists](/media/docs/tempo/sampling/tempo-decision-point-sampling.svg)

> When the first span for the trace is observed, the decision period time of 10 seconds is initiated. Once the decision period has expired, the tail sampler won’t have observed any spans with an error status, and will therefore discard the trace spans.

Reviewer 3: https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#once

```suggestion
When the first span for the trace is observed, the decision period time of 10 seconds is initiated.
After the decision period has expired, the tail sampler won't have observed any spans with an error status, and will therefore discard the trace spans.
```

![Decision points and caches workflow](/media/docs/tempo/sampling/tempo-alloy-sampling-policies.svg)

In the above diagram, should both caches be enabled, then a decision to drop samples for the trace is made after 10 seconds and the trace ID stored in the non-sampled cache.
This means that even spans that have an error status for that trace are dropped after the initial decision period, as the non-sampled cache matches the trace ID and pre-emptively drops the span.
However, the same is true should a sampled decision have been made, where any future spans do not match any policies but whose trace ID is found in the sampled cache.

Understanding how these caches work ensures that you still keep decisions that have previously been made.
For example, you could use the sampled cache to short-circuit future decisions for a trace, immediately sampling the incoming span.
This allows a decision to be made without having to buffer any other spans.

Here are some general guidelines for using caches.
Every installation is different.
Using the caches can impact the amount of data generated.

> | Cache type | Use case | Benefits/Considerations |
> |---|---|---|
> | Sample caches | Keep any future spans from traces that have been sampled.  | Cuts down span storage per trace to only those matching policies.  <br /> Can cause fragmented tracing. |
> | Non-sampled | Drop any future spans from traces where a decision to not sample those traces has explicitly occurred. | Lowers chance of storing traces after the initial decision period. <br/> Will miss any trace whose spans exhibit future policy criteria matching. |
> | Both | Use an initial decision period that makes a decision once and uses that decision going forward.  | Guarantees capture of full traces. <br /> Lower chance of capturing useful traces with a long duration. <br /> Can lose spans if they are longer than the decision period. |

Reviewer 3: The third column appears to be a list and should be marked up as such rather than using line breaks to control presentation.

https://developers.google.com/style/tables#multi-paragraph-table-cells.

Also should the table have four columns, one for each of benefits and considerations?

```suggestion
| Cache type    | Use case                                                                                               | Benefits/Considerations                                                                                                                                                                       |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Sample caches | Keep any future spans from traces that have been sampled.                                              | <ul><li>Cuts down span storage per trace to only those matching policies.</li><li> Can cause fragmented tracing.</li></ul>                                                                    |
| Non-sampled   | Drop any future spans from traces where a decision to not sample those traces has explicitly occurred. | <ul><li>Lowers chance of storing traces after the initial decision period. </li><li>Misses any trace whose spans exhibit future policy criteria matching.</li></ul>                           |
| Both          | Use an initial decision period that makes a decision once and uses that decision going forward.        | <ul><li>Guarantees capture of full traces.</li><li>Lower chance of capturing useful traces with a long duration.</li><li>Can lose spans if they are longer than the decision period.</li><ul> |
```

Author: Thank you for reformatting the table! I don't think the 4th column would be necessary since the use cases and benefits aren't a 1:1.

The load balancing maintains consistent hashing across all instances.

Tail sampling load balancing is usually carried out by running two layers of collectors.
The first layer receives the telemetry data (in this case trace spans), and then distributes these to the second layer that carries out the sampling policies.

![Load balancing incoming traces using Alloy](/media/docs/tempo/sampling/tempo-alloy-sampling-loadbalancing.svg)

Alloy includes a [load-balancing exporter](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.exporter.loadbalancing/) that can carry out routing to further collector targets based on a set number of keys (in the case of trace sampling, usually the `traceID` key).
Alloy uses the [OpenTelemetry load balancing exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/exporter/loadbalancingexporter/README.md).

The routing key ensures that a specific collector in the second layer always handles spans from the same trace ID, guaranteeing that sampling decisions are made correctly.

> You can configure the exporter with targets using static IPs, multi-IP DNS A record entries, and a Kubernetes headless service resolver.

Reviewer 3: I can't find an exact rule but Google style encourages IP addresses over just IPs.

https://developers.google.com/style/examples#example-ip-addresses

```suggestion
You can configure the exporter with targets using static IP addresses, multi-IP DNS A record entries, and a Kubernetes headless service resolver.
```
